hi okay hold on it's got a load so hi
I'm Claire it's somewhat daunting to
follow these talks by terrifying
intelligent people about blockchain so
please humor me I'm honored and excited
to be here at grayer I've just an
organization I've been a fan of for a
long time and I'm here to talk about two
other things of which I am a fan women
and computers preferably together apart
is cool too so in March of this year I
published my first book is called
broadband get it about women and
computers together I did it for all the
reasons you would expect I wanted it to
exist I wanted to read it I needed it I
wanted some alternative computer heroes
to the ones I'd grown up with you know
people other than just men in garages
becoming millionaires bless their hearts
I wanted to understand what it meant to
be a woman using and interfacing with
them thinking about technology you know
if there was a lineage historically
which might include someone like me the
funny thing is ever since this book came
out as history people keep asking me
about the future I don't know anything
about the future I know one thing about
the future which I'll tell you later but
I have discovered a great deal about the
past and I want to share that with you
about this lineage of people that I've
discovered we could start anywhere with
it but I want to start in 1989 this is a
woman named Stacy Horne and in 1989 she
was a grad student in New York and she
started her own online community back in
those days they didn't call it social
media they called it computer mediated
communication CMC this is long before
the world wide web when online still
meant mostly a BBS a text window that
you dialed on the phone and paid for by
the hour these communities I'm sure you
all know once numbered in the thousands
all over the world administered by
system operators with a range of
subcultural interests as diverse as
anything online today but Stacey was a
big fan of this BBS in San Francisco
called the well you know very famous for
many reasons but when she started hers
she decided to she would make a version
of the well for the East Coast she
called it the East Coast hangout or echo
she started it on $2,000 of severance
pay from her job in her own
Greenwich Village apartment hosted on
servers surrounded by toy figurines and
lots of loose paperwork I want to start
with someone like Stacey today because
her story to me is such a powerful
antidote
you know the Silicon Valley myth makers
want us to believe that a vision of
success is something that looks like
serial entrepreneurship about the gross
and vast accumulation of capital of
thinking of companies as products
themselves to be bought and sold on the
global marketplace they don't often talk
about scrappy community builders like
Stacey you've never really made a dime
even though it's founded before the
first web browser echo is still online
today which means it's one of the oldest
continuously operating online
communities in the world it's achieved
that status by keeping things pretty
bare-bones as you can see that's what it
looks like in the present day Stacey
never sold never franchise she never
advertised she never indulged in the
fantasy of like a lucrative bubble era
IPO she just ran this bare-bones
community for her people when the web
first came along she couldn't afford to
make the switch to hypertext so it has
remained this UNIX based service leaving
it kind of outside of time has a
text-only world accessible only to those
who have sent away in the mail for
accounts this is Stacey with the echo
servers in the early 1990s when she was
kind of like a cyber culture rockstar
but when she founded echo in 89 women
made up of only barely 10% of the
population online and it was interesting
to say the least to be a woman online
using a female identity in early social
spaces like muds and moves and BBS's
usually led to immediate online
harassment so a lot of women used gender
neutral or male aliases just to get by
and not be bothered it was also really
difficult for women to find each other
on the early internet because a lot of
people were hiding behind various
personas but echo in this time was 40%
female it almost had parity which made
it one of the earliest spaces online to
be accessible to women and hospitable to
women Stacey always resisted the idea
that she created echo as a kind of safe
space she was a real nineties chick so
she said bite me
wanted to get more women on that go to
make it better which is a really great
way of thinking about it she had more
female users than anybody else on the
internet on an entirely mostly
male-dominated Internet because she was
the only person trying she recruited
people from non-technical spaces she
would go to parties and bars and
happenings in New York City and just try
to sell hipsters on the idea of buying a
100 dollar modem which at the time
seemed insane and unreasonable she made
access for women free for an entire year
she would go to women's groups and talk
to them about the Internet she gave MS
and Peggy in their own conference on BBS
she gave female users their own private
space on the service so that they could
report instances of harassment and just
hang out with each other she spoke to
women's groups she taught UNIX courses
out of her apartment so that a technical
like know-how wouldn't be a limitation
she wanted people there
joining her she was a real teacher this
is her teaching Charlie Rose how to use
BBS in the early nineties rf1 but her
main strategy was even simpler was this
baked into the design so back in the
days of BBS most PBS's were moderated by
hosts which were just users who were
deputized by the service given free
access in order for hosting as you would
host a party in your home right like
giving people things to talk about
making sure nobody was bugging each
other moving conversation along being
generally present and sort of the
responsible authority on the
conversation every single conversation
or conference on echo had two hosts
always one male host one female host
that was baked into the design that way
when women were signing on sometimes for
the very first time in the history of
their lives they would see other women
in the mix in the power structure as
well as in the culture of this place it
led them feel represented in this new
territory which is a very powerful thing
Stacy managed all this on an entirely
male-dominated Internet almost because
she cared enough to make it so and her
platform has remained online nurturing
this tiny but fervent community of users
for decades because she has cared enough
to keep it so and that's something that
we don't hear as much as I would like to
these days this
idea of care care for many in tech as an
industry caring means caring about
investing without the immediate promise
of renew marae ssin in building
something insanely great as Steve Jobs
want to say it means risking stability
and sanity in order to build things and
change the world and make money and sure
that's admirable but what Stacy's legacy
represents to me is not caring about but
caring after caring for you know
continuing the commitment to a community
beyond the early days of a start-up and
into the kind of tedious work a day
realities of a technological platform
once built I think it's something that
deserves to be honored and I know that
something like echo can never really
compete with its own inheritors that
could barely compete with its
contemporaries at the time but I still
always come back to Stacy's story
because beyond the sort of simple
entrepreneurial you know accomplishment
of it it represents what can happen when
tech opens itself up to women even a
little bit which is that we bring more
women in and we bring more people in and
in doing so we bring a different
perspective to the table we begin to
reflect the world a little bit more
authentically we start making things
that work closely serve the communities
that they're meant to serve and that's
something that comes up again and again
in the history of women and computers my
two favorite things and that's kind of
what I want to talk about today because
as someone who has spent a good amount
of years researching this stuff if
you're just looking for women in the
history of Technology does heatmap
trying to find them in the history
always look first in the places where it
makes life better easier more connected
look for the places where form gives way
to function a computer is a machine that
condenses the world into numbers to be
manipulated and processed making that as
comprehensible as possible to as many
people as possible regardless of
technical skill background or expertise
is not an essentially feminine pursuit
because of course nothing is but all the
women I've talked to in the process of
writing this book seem to understand it
implicitly
as being fundamental inalienable and
right so I'm going to share a couple
more stories from my book about women at
the front lines of Technology in the
early days and in the process I hope
lessons because as we face issues of
privacy and identity in society in this
complicated world we have a lot to learn
from our forebears because they're the
first to encounter some of these
problems which you know blockchain Don
was standing have never really changed
okay lesson one this one comes to us
from Radia Perlman who when this photo
was taken in the early 1970s was one of
only about 50 women in her class of a
thousand at MIT in co-ed housing she was
the only woman the resident oddity she
didn't fit in with the crowd on campus
of future engineers and computer
scientists because she didn't really
even like computers she had been a
precocious math whiz as a kid and one of
her elementary school teachers had
gotten her into a programming class but
when she showed up she felt so
overwhelmed by how out of place she was
she was surrounded by all these
seven-year-old boys who'd been taking
radios apart since they were you know
old enough to talk and they knew all
these fancy computer words like output
and input she'd never taken apart a
radio because she'd assumed perhaps
rightly that she would get electrocuted
or get in trouble in her first computer
science course at MIT the course
instructor returned her very first
assignment back to her with a an angry
note saying that she had done something
terribly wrong
he had presumed on purpose sent the
computer into a loop and wasted an
entire ream of paper her first
programming job was at the AI lab at MIT
where all the other male programmers
surrounded her and tried to do things
that were helpful like sit around her
and look at all of her mistakes and tell
her what she was doing wrong to this day
she calls herself a last a doctor and
although she eventually did crack
programming she gave it up decades ago
and yet Radia Perlman is one of the most
respected computer scientists in the
world
she's a routing protocol designer she
designs the algorithms which determine
the flow of data across entire networks
when she was at Digital Equipment
Corporation in the 80s she was
fundamental to the evolution of Ethernet
she quite literally wrote the textbook
on network design if you were taking a
network design class you've probably
read her book but don't just take my
word for it here is Radia herself in
talking about her role on the internet
without me
some of the designs some of the
alternate designs if you just blew on
the internet it would fall over and die
can you imagine the confidence that it
takes to say that without me if you just
blew on the internet it would fall over
and die and she's right she really is
the lesson here is that as a culture
were fed a lot of myths about what it
takes to be a good engineer or to
succeed in tech as an industry and that
old chestnut about having taken radios
apart at an early age seems to come up a
lot in the culture and I have been told
in job interviews too and certainly
tinkerers like that are an asset I'm
sure I'm surrounded by many of you but
they're not able to do the kind of thing
that radio can do which is step outside
of a complex system and see the larger
patterns of play to design explicitly
with ease-of-use in mind not despite of
her early experiences with computers but
because of them because she had felt so
intimidated by Hardware growing up she
designs things that someone like herself
would want to use which is that they
just work and you don't have to think
about it at all the lesson here is
pretty simple that diversity of all
kinds bring immeasurable value to
whatever it is that we are doing and
diversity of mind is one of those things
it is highly damaging to think that only
certain kinds of people with certain
kinds of aptitudes
are worthy of contributing to technology
people like Radia who don't just think
outside of the box but kind of have
contempt for the Box those are the
people that can have the conceptual
distance to make really disruptive
innovations and to meet the user where
they are listen to this one from the 80s
this is Wendy Hall Dame Wendy Hall
actually she was given the female
equivalent of a knighthood for her
contributions to computer science but
when this photo was taken in the in the
80s she was a lowly lecturer at the
University of Southampton in the UK she
was fascinated by this very newfangled
concept called hypertext which in those
days before the web just meant the idea
the practice of connecting ideas
information on screens through links
turning all of the digitized digitized
data the computer memory makes
of all into useful applicable meaningful
knowledge
Wendy's colleagues at Southampton told
her that there was no future for her in
her department or in computer science at
all if she kept on with this hypertext
stuff which they saw as being frivolous
not as serious as things like writing
programming languages and compilers but
she ignored them because she was kind of
blinded by this idea of what it would be
like to create an interactive system for
say Library Archives that people could
navigate on-screen through screen based
links at the time again a very novel
concept she began with the archives at
her own University at the University of
Southampton but by 1989 she'd led a team
to build an entire system called
microcosm here it is just as the world
wide web would do some years later
microcosm demonstrated this new totally
intuitive way of navigating all this
multimedia information that computers
could contain it made that information
dynamic alive and adaptable to the user
in fact it wasn't really like the web at
all it was in many ways better and this
is probably like extremely basic 101 for
dummies stuff to this crowd so forgive
me but on the web links are contextual
embedded in documents which means that
when the destination of a link has
changed taken down we say that link has
rotten right we got a 404 error and the
piece of information about what
connected those two ideas together is
gone forever and that's a huge loss to
our culture because that is meaningful
information it is information about
people making connections between things
microcosm however kept all of its links
separate in a database meant to be
regularly updated and maintained a link
base this link base would communicate
with the underlying documents without
leaving a mark on them which made a link
in microcosm more like a flexible
information overlay rather than a
structural change to the material
effectively this meant that a link could
have more than one destination a link
could go back and forth a link could be
adapted to the user so for example a
more complex set of links could be laid
on top the same material for a more
expert or advanced user
where the web focuses on connecting
documents wendy was more interested in
the nature of those connections and how
discrete ideas link together and why
in conclusion microcosm was great but
she wasn't alone in this I mean between
84 and 91 there were tons and tons of
hypertext systems like Wendy's emerging
from universities and from research labs
at companies like Apple IBM Xerox
Symbolics and Sun Microsystems I will
say I mean none of these look very
glamorous of course but they are
fascinating and nearly every major team
building hypertext systems during this
period had women in senior positions
many reasons for that largely because
hypertext is a really convivial
discipline that was open to people from
different backgrounds and all these
early hypertext conferences would have
poets and writers and social scientists
and humanists anyone who is interested
in the nature of making meaning on a
screen Wendy tells me that the
conference's of those days were full of
the literati if you can imagine it
wasn't just the take a radio apart types
it was anyone interested in meaning
anyway that was like so much a big part
of what hypertext as a scene and as a
discipline was about was this value of
the associations between documents
rather than the documents themselves
because they really cared deeply about
the why because from why emerges the
deepest kind of meaning it was so much
so that when Tim berners-lee Sir Tim
berners-lee first presented the World
Wide Web in the United States at
hypertext 91 conference in San Antonio
most people who were there thought the
system was totally juvenile in fact his
paper about the web was not accepted to
hypertext 91 and he was forced to on his
own dime lug is $10,000 next Cube all
the way from CERN to demonstrate the web
on the conference floor like a Ramada in
San Antonio I mean look at how
unimpressed the women in this picture
are people took one look at this system
at people who have been working and
studying hypertext for a decade and
thought like this is never going to work
because the links are contextual they
only go in one direction so what is the
point of a hypertext system if the links
can break it just didn't make any sense
it was counter to every
thing that that community of scholars
was doing and a sidebar story so this is
an amazing anecdote so he presented the
world wide web for the very first time
in the US during the demos portion of
the conference which is after all the
talks and papers of the day at the same
time as the demos portion was the social
hour held on the patio outside of the
conference hotel a major feature of that
social hour was margarita fountain
because this is San Antonio in the
summer and so the very first time that
the world wide web was being shown in
the United States almost everyone at the
conference was outside getting
shit-faced on margaritas and you can
even tell in this picture like right
next to where the next Cuba's that's a
margarita that's a little bit melty but
it's there so that's like how nonplussed
everybody was they were like [__] this
anyway but like you know a year later or
two years later Tim berners-lee was
keynote at the hypertext conference and
you know by a few years nobody could
remember the names of any of these
systems so what is the lesson here well
nothing happens in a vacuum
you know technologies never fall fully
formed from the sky they emerge along a
continuum of ideas the web borrowed
actually a lot of concepts from those
early systems like the idea of an anchor
link but it's more like those early
systems created the conditions for the
web to emerge right they were the warm
little pool from which life first
stirred tech history is so often about
solitary genius you know our Tim
berners-lee's and our Steve Jobs and our
Bill Gates's and of course those people
are remarkable but they're never alone
right they were surrounded because
making big things requires big
communities and that's what makes
technology so deeply fascinating an
interconnected inter twinkled as Ted
Nelson would say but it's also what
makes it hard to acknowledge where
things come from sometimes not until
much later and who deserves credit okay
so three lessons from ancient tech
history that might be applicable today
one that a diverse user base a diverse
workplace a diverse product of diverse
technology is not something that just
comes it must be worked for sometimes
through Herculean efforts of outreach
and representation but that once it's
done it's always worth the trouble
because it makes a better thing
different kinds of minds contribute
different kinds of value
and nothing happens in a vacuum because
technology is a collective effort the
last thing I want to share today is
probably again old news to most of you
but I want to say it anyway as a coda as
a reminder as an incantation maybe that
it's important for women in tech or
women who use tech to know that
computing is absolutely historically and
centrally our domain during the second
world war women hired to operate
computing machines were the first
programmers and after the war women led
the charge for the development of what
was then called automatic programming
which is just the idea that programmers
should be able to step above the machine
level and code at a higher level of
abstraction which led to nothing other
nothing less than development of
programming languages themselves and the
evolution of programming into a symbolic
art in the 60s women were half of the
workforce in the computing industry and
women earned 40% of computer science
degrees in American Universities until
1984 when that number started to dive
and has kept diving in a decline
unrivaled by any other professional
field in history this is an article from
Cosmo 1967-1968 the computer girls
advocating for programming is a
interesting lucrative alternative to
secretarial work Grace Hopper is quoted
in this article saying that programming
is like planning a dinner party ok it
was a very feminized landscape it's true
you have to plan and you have to plan
ahead and schedule everything so it's
ready when you need it it's true if
you're planning a dinner party what
happened after this is the ongoing
question a lot of factors conspired
right as the early computing industry
developed there was a lack of mentorship
as the first generation of programmers
aged out of the field there was as
always problems of wage disparity a lack
of a sort of structural unwillingness to
make space for childcare
a shift in the professional credentials
and educational requirements necessary
to get a job as a programmer which often
unfairly penalized people who might have
taken time off from school to raise
children several really great technology
historians were much better at the stuff
than me have suggested that the
professionalization of computing as an
industry led implicitly to its
masculinization so if it started
feminine it had to be made masculine
that the semantic shift from coder or
operator to software engineer that
happened in the late 60s was a signal
about who this field was supposed to be
for this seems to have set a certain
male-dominated precedent that has only
reinforced itself through years through
marketing more than most things and
misconception as being somehow natural
this is an Apple commercial ad
commercial as being somehow natural to
computing but it's not it's not I'll say
it again it's not and there are plenty
of us in this room who are proof so if
you remember nothing else from this talk
remember this it's that if there is a
boys club that dominates Silicon Valley
today it's an anachronism it took a
generation to create it and it will
probably take a generation and change to
fully undo it
to say nothing of breaking it open even
further to new unprecedented levels of
inclusivity because we start so young
with this stuff but I believe firmly
that in a technological world
technological histories are important
and if women and girls can see
themselves in the foundation of this
most transformative technologies then we
can see ourselves in its future and when
it comes to the future I said I only
know one thing and that's we're going to
need all the help we can get thank you
[Applause]